**Overturn the Book Market!**

Author - lamescholar, 2023.<br/><br/>

On reaching Jerusalem, Jesus entered the temple courts and began driving out those who were buying and selling there. He overturned the tables of the money changers and the benches of those selling doves, and would not allow anyone to carry merchandise through the temple courts. And as he taught them, he said, “Is it not written: ‘My house will be called a house of prayer for all nations’ ? But you have made it ‘a den of robbers.’ ” he chief priests and the teachers of the law heard this and began looking for a way to kill him, for they feared him, because the whole crowd was amazed at his teaching. When evening came, Jesus and his disciples went out of the city.

 [Mark 11:15-19](https://www.biblestudytools.com/mark/11.html)<br/><br/>

<https://www.theverge.com/2023/3/20/23641457/internet-archive-hachette-lawsuit-court-copyright-fair-use>

Recent lawsuit against Internet Archive endangers digital book lending.<br/><br/>

What is the Internet Archive? It's one of the biggest foundations dedicated to industrial-scale digitization of books, music and films. Unlike many other foundations this digitization undertaking doesn't lock up the digitized materials "for the future", practically eradicating recent cultural heritage for modern generation. Internet Archive found a loop-hole in modern copyright law to lend an ebook to one person at a time, as public library do with paper books.

Why it's important to give access to digitized materials? Why "preservation for the future" isn't enough? There is two moments of cultural preservation. To physically preserve cultural materials is half a problem. Another, essential half is granting access to this cultural materials. If we let this lag of 70 years to exist, we will never live up to the future, when we will be able to explore, acquire most recent cultural developments. Think about it. Librarians, researchers, archivists - small group of people who have access to it write endless amounts descriptions, catalogues, reviews... for no one, but each other and future enthusiasts. It's stolen culture enrichment. Why? Why it is stolen?

"As physical libraries closed their doors in the first months of the coronavirus pandemic, the Internet Archive launched what it called the National Emergency Library, removing the “own-to-loan” restriction and letting unlimited numbers of people access each ebook with a two-week lending period. Publishers and some authors complained about the move. Legal action from Hachette Book Group, HarperCollins Publishers, John Wiley & Sons, and Penguin Random House - a list that includes three of the print industry’s “Big Five” publishers - followed soon after.

Publishers took aim not just at the National Emergency Library, however, but also at the Open Library and the theory of CDL (controlled digital lending, loan to one person at the time - lamescholar) in general. The service constitutes “willful digital piracy on an industrial scale,” the complaint alleged. “Without any license or any payment to authors or publishers, IA scans print books, uploads these illegally scanned books to its servers, and distributes verbatim digital copies of the books in whole via public-facing websites. With just a few clicks, any Internet-connected user can download complete digital copies of in-copyright books.” More generally, “CDL is an invented paradigm that is well outside copyright law ... based on the false premise that a print book and a digital book share the same qualities."

Because bunch of publishers will lose their profits. This whole situation shows hopelessness of using the legal loop-holes, to try, at least one reader at a time, grant access to books to anybody. Overthrow the book market! Overthrow the trade of culture! Publication of all data banks, all books and articles databases now! Fuck these monopolist publishing houses! And cut the crap about money incentive to the writers and profitability of enterprise! This whole enterprise lose a meaning, if it's purpose is growth for sake of growth regardless of successful fulfilling of its function. Unconditional access to all databases of digitized materials! Culture to the people!